Intro R revamp (PR 3 of n) : Add second notebook (#164)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: intro-to-R-tidyverse/02-intro_to_ggplot2.Rmd

```{r}
stats_df
```

We can take a look at a column individually by using a `$`. 
Note we are using `head()` so the whole thing doesn' print out. 

```{r}
head(stats_df$contrast)
```

If we want to see less values at once, we can use brackets with the indices of the values we'd like returned.

```{r}
stats_df$avg_expression[1:10]
```

Let's checkout how many rows of data there are per each contrast.

```{r}
summary(as.factor(stats_df$contrast))
```

## Set up the dataset

Make a new variable of -log10 p values and for that we'll use `dplyr::mutate`.

```{r}
stats_df <- mutate(stats_df, # data.frame we'd like to add a variable to
                   neg_log_p_val = -log10(p_value))
```

Let's filter to only `male_female` contrast data. 
First let's try out a logical expression: 

```{r}
stats_df$contrast == "male_female"
```

Notice that we are not reassigning here, so this filtered dataset will not be saved to the environment

```{r}
filter(stats_df, contrast == "male_female")
```

Now we can reassign to `male_female_df`. 

```{r}
male_female_df <- filter(stats_df, contrast == "male_female")
```

## Plotting this data

Let's make a volcano plot with this data. 

> First let's take a look at only the tumor vs normal data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First let's take a look at only the tumor vs. normal comparison. 
```

Let's save this as a separate data.frame by assigning it a new name. 

```{r}
tumor_normal_df <- filter(stats_df, contrast == "astrocytoma_normal") 
```

> We will use this data.frame in `ggplot` function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make this plot we will be using functions from the `ggplot2` package, the main plotting package of the tidyverse.
We use the first function, `ggplot()` to define the data that will be plotted.

`ggplot()` takes two main arguments:

1. `data`, which is the data frame that contains the data we want to plot
2. `mapping`, which is a special list made with the `aes()` function to describe which values will be used for each **aes**thetic component of the plot, such as the x and y coordinates of each point. (If you find calling things like the x and y coordinates "aesthetics" confusing, don't worry, you are not alone.)
```

```{r}

> ggplot(tumor_normal_df, # This first part has the data.frame of data we want to plot

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ggplot(tumor_normal_df, # This first argument is the data frame with the data we want to plot
```

>        aes(x = log_fold_change, # This is the column name of the data we want to be the x-axis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       aes(x = log_fold_change, # This is the column name of the values we want to use for the x coordinates
```

>            y = neg_log_p_val) # This is the column name of the data we want for the y-axis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           y = neg_log_p_val) # This is the column name for the y coordinates
```

       )
```

You'll notice this plot doesn't have anything on it because we haven't 
specified a plot type yet. 

> To do that, we will add another ggplot layer with `+`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do that, we will add another ggplot layer with `+` which will specify exactly what we want to plot.
A volcano plot is a special kind of scatter plot, so to make that we will want to plot individual points, which we can do with `geom_point()`
```

```{r}
# This first part is the same as before
ggplot(tumor_normal_df,
       aes(x = log_fold_change, 
           y = neg_log_p_val)) + 
  # Now we are adding on a layer to specify what kind of plot we want
  geom_point()
```

Here's a brief summary of ggplot2 structure. 
[ggplot2 structure](diagrams/ggplot_structure.png)

### Adjust our ggplot

Now that we have a base plot that shows our data, we can add layers on to it and adjust it.
We can adjust the color points using `color`. 

```{r}
ggplot(tumor_normal_df, 
       aes(x = log_fold_change,
           y = neg_log_p_val,
           color = avg_expression) # We added this argument to color code the points!
       ) + 
  geom_point()
```

Because we have so many points overlapping one another, we will want to adjust 
the transparency, which we can do with an `alpha` argument. 

```{r}
ggplot(tumor_normal_df, 
       aes(x = log_fold_change,
           y = neg_log_p_val,
           color = avg_expression)
       ) + 
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) # We are using the `alpha` argument to make our points transparent

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Notice that we added the `alpha` within the `geom_point()` function, not to the `aes()`. We did this because we want all of the points to have the same level of transparency, and it will not vary depending on any variable in the data .
```

> We can also change the background and aesthetics by adding a `theme`.

Reviewer: Trying to avoid "aesthetic" except in the context of `aes()`
```suggestion
We can also change the background and  appearance of the plot as a whole by adding a `theme`.
```

```{r}
ggplot(tumor_normal_df, 
       aes(x = log_fold_change, 
           y = neg_log_p_val,
           color = avg_expression)
       ) + 
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) +

>   theme_bw() # Add on this set of aesthetics to make it pretty

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  theme_bw() # Add on this set of appearance presets to make it pretty
```

```

We can change the x and y labels by using `ylab` and `xlab` functions and add a
title using `ggtitle`.

```{r}
ggplot(tumor_normal_df, 
       aes(x = log_fold_change, 
           y = neg_log_p_val,
           color = avg_expression)
       ) + 
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) +
  theme_bw() + 
  xlab("log10 Fold Change") + # Add an x label
  ylab("-log10 p value") # Add a y label
  ggtitle("Astrocytoma Tumor vs Normal Cerebellum") # Add main title
```

Use this chunk to make the same kind of plot as the previous chunk but instead plot the male female contrast data, that is stored in `male_female_df`. 

```{r}
# Use this chunk to make the same kind of volcano plot, but with the male-female contrast data. 
```

> Turns out, we don't have to plot each contrast separately, instead, we can use the originally data.frame that contains all three contrasts' data, `stats_df`, and add a `facet_wrap` to make each contrast its own plot. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Turns out, we don't have to plot each contrast separately, instead, we can use the original data frame that contains all three contrasts' data, `stats_df`, and add a `facet_wrap` to make each contrast its own plot. 
```

We are also using `file.path()`, which allows us to specify file locations that will work regardless of the operating system being used. 
The resulting data.frame will be stored in a variable named `stats_df`.

```{r}
stats_df <- read_tsv(file.path(
  data_dir,
  "gene_results_GSE44971.tsv"
))
```

Let's take a look at what this data.frame looks like: 

```{r}
stats_df
```

We can take a look at a column individually by using a `$`. 
Note we are using `head()` so the whole thing doesn't print out. 

```{r}
head(stats_df$contrast)
```

If we want to see a specific set of values, we can use brackets with the indices of the values we'd like returned.

```{r}
stats_df$avg_expression[6:10]
```

Let's checkout how many rows of data there are per each contrast.

```{r}
summary(stats_df)
```

## Set up the dataset

Before we make our plot, we want to calculate a set of new values for each row; transformations of the raw statistics in our table.
To do this we will use a function from the `dplyr` package called `mutate()` to make a new column of -log10 p values.

```{r}
stats_df <- mutate(stats_df, # data.frame we'd like to add a variable to

>   neg_log_p_val = -log10(p_value)

Reviewer: If, as I suspect, the other log is not a log10, we might want to name this something like `neg_log10p` for clarity.

```

Because we have so many points overlapping one another, we will want to adjust 
the transparency, which we can do with an `alpha` argument. 

```{r}
ggplot(
  tumor_normal_df,
  aes(
    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val,
    color = avg_expression
  )
) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) # We are using the `alpha` argument to make our points transparent
```

Notice that we added the alpha within the `geom_point()` function, not to the `aes()`. 
We did this because we want all of the points to have the same level of transparency, and it will not vary depending on any variable in the data.
We can also change the background and appearance of the plot as a whole by adding a `theme`.

```{r}
ggplot(
  tumor_normal_df,
  aes(
    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val,
    color = avg_expression
  )
) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) +
  theme_bw() # Add on this set of appearance presets to make it pretty
```

We can change the x and y labels by using `ylab` and `xlab` functions and add a
title using `ggtitle`.

```{r}
ggplot(
  tumor_normal_df,
  aes(
    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val,
    color = avg_expression
  )
) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) +
  theme_bw() +

>   xlab("log10 Fold Change") + # Add an x label

Reviewer: I think this is log2, not log10, but check with limma. And we should specify the direction of the comparison: Tumor/Normal, I believe.

Author: Yes! You are right. It's log2.

```

Use this chunk to make the same kind of plot as the previous chunk but instead plot the male female contrast data, that is stored in `male_female_df`. 

```{r}
# Use this chunk to make the same kind of volcano plot, but with the male-female contrast data.
```

Turns out, we don't have to plot each contrast separately, instead, we can use the original data frame that contains all three contrasts' data, `stats_df`, and add a `facet_wrap` to make each contrast its own plot. 

```{r}
ggplot(
  stats_df, # Switch to the bigger data.frame with all three contrasts' data
  aes(
    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val,
    color = avg_expression
  )
) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) +
  theme_bw() +
  facet_wrap(~contrast) +
  xlab("log2 Fold Change Tumor/Normal") 
  ylab("-log10 p value")
```

We can store the plot as an object in the global environment by using `<-` operator. 
Here we will call it `volcano_plot`. 

```{r}
volcano_plot <- ggplot(
  stats_df, # We are calling this plot `volcano_plot`
  aes(
    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val,
    color = avg_expression
  )
) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) +
  theme_bw() +
  facet_wrap(~contrast) +

>   xlab("log2 Fold Change Tumor/Normal") 

Reviewer: Not just Tumor/Normal in this plot.

    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val
  )
) +
  # Now we are adding on a layer to specify what kind of plot we want
  geom_point()
```

Here's a brief summary of ggplot2 structure. 
[ggplot2 structure](diagrams/ggplot_structure.png)

### Adjust our ggplot

Now that we have a base plot that shows our data, we can add layers on to it and adjust it.
We can adjust the color points using `color`. 

```{r}
ggplot(
  tumor_normal_df,
  aes(
    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val,
    color = avg_expression
  ) # We added this argument to color code the points!
) +
  geom_point()
```

Because we have so many points overlapping one another, we will want to adjust 
the transparency, which we can do with an `alpha` argument. 

```{r}
ggplot(
  tumor_normal_df,
  aes(
    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val,
    color = avg_expression
  )
) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) # We are using the `alpha` argument to make our points transparent
```

Notice that we added the alpha within the `geom_point()` function, not to the `aes()`. 
We did this because we want all of the points to have the same level of transparency, and it will not vary depending on any variable in the data.

> We can also change the background and appearance of the plot as a whole by adding a `theme`.

Reviewer: Let me know what you think if this. We can add the `geom_hline()` to lower plots as well if you like it. Feel free to change the color or anything else if you have preferences. (dotted line?)
 
```suggestion

We are not limited to a single plotting layer. 
For example, if we want to add a horizontal line to indicate a significance cutoff, we can do that with `geom_hline()`.
For now, we will choose the value of 5.5 (that is close to a Bonferonni correction) and add that to the plot.

```{r}
ggplot(
  tumor_normal_df,
  aes(
    x = log_fold_change,
    y = neg_log_p_val,
    color = avg_expression
  )
) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.2) + 
  geom_hline(yintercept = 5.5, color = "darkgreen") # we can specify colors by names here
```

We can also change the background and appearance of the plot as a whole by adding a `theme`.
```

Author: Added this!
